Luc Argand (born 7 January 1948) is a Swiss lawyer, and a partner at the Kellerhals Carrard law firm since 2019. Prior to that, he was a senior partner at the De Pfyffer law firm in Geneva. He is a former Chairman of the Geneva Bar Association.Luc Argand competed in the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich in the sailing Flying Dutchman category. He has been a judge for the Court of Arbitration for Sport since 1990, and notably presided over the trials of tennis player Richard Gasquet and cyclist Richard Virenque. He was a legal advisor to Bernie Ecclestone, and a trustee of Formula One Holdings until 2004. He was also the President of the Geneva Motor Show from 2005 until 2011.


== Career and High Profile Cases ==
Luc Argand acted as a lawyer for French businessman Serge Dassault, who was convicted in France of tax fraud and charged with electoral corruption in connection with his term as mayor of Corbeil-Essonnes. "This former president of the bar managed several foundations that held bank accounts that housed Dassault's money," explains Yann Philippin, a journalist at Mediapart and co-author of the book Dassault Système (Robert Laffont). The case was finally brought to trial after Serge Dassaut's death, and Jean-Pierre Bechter, former mayor of the town and former right hand of Dassault, was sentenced to jail term for two years.     
Luc Argand is also called in as one of the legal advisers for Lebanese-born Nigerian businessman Gilbert Chagoury, who was under investigation for the Nigerian dictator Abacha clan money laundering and corruption scandal. In 2000, Gilbert Chagoury concluded an agreement with Nigeria to return funds misappropriated by the Abacha family and channeled through his Swiss accounts.   As a judge on the Court of Arbitration for Sport, Luc Argand notably presided over the trials of tennis player Richard Gasquet and cyclist Richard Virenque. He is a legal advisor to Bernie Ecclestone and was a director of Formula One Holdings until 2004. Luc Argand was also a director of Banque Privée Edmond Rothschild in Geneva between 1984 and 2020, and currently sits on the boards of Edmond de Rothschild Holding SA and Holding Benjamin & Edmond de Rothschild SA.


== References ==


== External links ==
Luc Argand at Olympedia